‘SUE COE: GRAPHIC RESISTANCE’ at MoMA PS 1 (through Sept. 9). In the East Village in the early 1980s, this British-American artist showed some of the strongest political art of the day, and in the most traditional of media: figurative painting, drawing and printmaking. But her kind of directness has had a hard time in a market-driven world that favors the convenient slipperiness of ambiguity. As a result, Ms. Coe was left out of many of the big “political” shows of the 1980s and ’90s, and has had spotty visibility since. Some the artist’s great early pieces are in this long overdue survey, including the 1983 mural-size collage painting titled “Woman Walks Into Bar — Is Raped by Four Men on the Pool Table — While 20 Watch.” The show also features later pictures like “Road to White House” (1992) and selections from her recent sketchbooks. Together they indicate that her style has changed over the years, growing at once more abstract and more naturalistic, but her view of the ethical mission of art has not. (Holland Cotter)

718-784-2084, momaps1.org

‘MARY CORSE’ at Dia:Beacon in Beacon, N.Y., and ‘MARY CORSE: A SURVEY IN LIGHT’ at the Whitney Museum of American Art (through Nov. 25). Light, and specifically the radiant light of Los Angeles, shaped Ms. Corse’s career. She became interested not just in representing light, but also in making objects that emitted or reflected it. This duo of shows features her light boxes — or “light paintings” — made with argon gas and Tesla coils, as well as her paintings on canvas that include glass microspheres, like those used in the lines that divide highway lanes. Both shows are overdue representations for Ms. Corse, who was an early member of the loosely defined Light and Space movement of the 1960s and ’70s in California. (Schwendener)

212-570-3600, whitney.org

‘CROWNS OF THE VAJRA MASTERS: RITUAL ART OF NEPAL’ at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (through Dec. 16). Up a narrow staircase, above the Met’s galleries of South and Southeast Asian art, are three small rooms of art from the Himalayas. The space, a bit like a treehouse, is a capsule of spiritual energy, which is especially potent these days thanks to this exhibition. The crowns of the title look like antique versions of astronaut headgear: gilded copper helmets, studded with gems, encrusted with repoussé plaques and topped by five-pronged antennas — the vajra, or thunderbolt of wisdom. Such crowns were believed to turn their wearers into perfected beings who are willing and able to bestow blessings on the world. This show is the first to focus on these crowns, and it does so with a wealth of compressed historical information, as well as several resplendent related sculptures and paintings from Nepal and Tibet. But it’s the crowns themselves, the real ones, the wisdom generators, set in mandala formation in the center of the gallery, that are the fascinators. (Cotter)

212-535-7710, metmuseum.org

‘THE FACE OF DYNASTY: ROYAL CRESTS FROM WESTERN CAMEROON’ at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (through Sept. 3). In the African wing, a show of just four commanding wooden crowns constitutes a blockbuster in its own right. These massive wooden crests — in the form of stylized human faces with vast vertical brows — served as markers of royal power among the Bamileke peoples of the Cameroonian grasslands, and the Met’s recent acquisition of an 18th-century specimen is joined here by three later examples, each featuring sharply protruding cheeks, broadly smiling mouths and brows incised with involute geometric patterns. Ritual objects like these were decisive for the development of Western modernist painting, and a Cameroonian crest was even shown at MoMA in the 1930s, as a “sculpture” divorced from ethnography. But these crests had legal and diplomatic significance as well as aesthetic appeal, and their anonymous African creators had a political understanding of art not so far from our own. (Farago)

212-535-7710, metmuseum.org

‘GIACOMETTI’ at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum (through Sept. 12). This museum-filling outing for the signal sculptor of Western modernism is rather cautious — but revisionism can wait another day when the art looks as good as it does here. The Swiss artist’s witty and erotic early sculpture, such as the still-shocking “Disagreeable Object” (a phallic torture device with a spiked business end), enraptured the Surrealists in early 1930s Paris, but Giacometti was never content with an art of ideas, and in his filthy studio, he soon started making elongated, emaciated humanoids that have since become emblems of Europe’s postwar trauma. If you know Giacometti best for the bronzes that now go for obscene sums at auction, it’s a particular pleasure here to see his work in plaster, a medium he adored; the humility of the handwork testifies to his anxious mastery. (Farago)

212-423-3800, guggenheim.org